# Snakemake workflow for ONT WGS and Adaptive Sampling Alignment, modifications for 1000Genomes

This workflow uses unaligned called bam files of ONT data to produce aligned bam files, SNV calls, SV calls, CNV calls, VEP annotations, and QC statistics. All input bams should be checked for quality control prior to using this workflow.

The master branch is set up to use conda environments assumed to be on the user's path. Switch to the `conda_explicit` branch to use the .yamls in the /env directory and then modify the `config.yaml` on that branch. You could also use the yamls to make conda environments on your system and then use the `config_mcclintock.yaml` on the master branch. You should only do this if running on a new server. 

## Usage
```
snakemake -p --use-conda --cores 30
```

### Setup

1. Clone this repository to your **final destination for files**. Snakemake works best with relative paths.
2. Edit `Snakefile` to include the appropriate rules. Most likely this is already set up correctly. `get_targets` generates alignment files for all samples in the file `config/targets.txt`.
    - The workflow searches for bam files with a matching prefix (M[0-9]{5}) in the directory (`input_dir`) specified in the config file.
    - Optionally change `explicitLibraries` to `true` to specify a list of bam files in the `config/targets.txt` instead
    - choose to include either `config/config_mcclintock.yaml` or `config/config_franklin.yaml` depending on which server you would like to run on.
3. Create a sample database file, like  `config/NSC0000_example_config.tsv` with your sample information. 
    - All fields defined in `sampleDB_prefix_column_names` must be included, in addition to one named `Flowcell` and one named `Strategy`.
        - `Flowcell` is expected to be either `R9` or `R10`
        - `Strategy` should be `WGS` or `RU`. 
    - If using Adaptive Sampling, you must include a column named `BedFile` which is the path to a 4 column file with named regions of interest and their coordinates.
4. Edit `config/targets.txt` to include only the samples you wish to generate alignments for.
5. Edit `config/config_mcclintock.yaml` or `config/config_franklin.yaml` depending on which server you would like to run on.
    - if running on a new server, update paths for all reference data, tools, and input/output directories.
    - The filename base for all output files is defined with `prefix_regex` and `prefix_lookuup`. Variable names used in `prefix_lookup` should be listed in a comma separated string stored in `sampleDB_prefix_format_coluumns`. Column names from your config file should be listed in the same order in `sampleDB_prefix_column_names`.
    - `basecalled_bam_string` defines the pattern matching used to find bamfiles for each requested sampleID in `input_dir`. Use only wildcards defined in `prefix_regex`.
6. Run!

### Useful flags and recommendations

If work is interrupted or resumed after failure, use `--rerun-triggers mtime` to not re-generate already completed files and/or `--rerun-incomplete` to remove incomplete/corrupted files.

If mamba is not installed, use `--conda-frontend conda`.

For best performance, devote set `threads` to 30 in the config file and run with at least 1 additional core per group of 30 threads, e.g. if `threads: 30`, then run `snakemake --cores 62`. This allows non-processor intensive (but time intensive!) tasks to run in the background of tasks that are both processor and time intensive.

## Outputs

- Indexed bam file of full alignment
- If running Adaptive sampling, an indexed bam file of all regions in the target bed file.
- SNV vcf generated with clair3, phased and not phased
- SV vcfs, phased and not phased
    - generated by sniffles
    - generated by SVIM
    - generated by cuteSV
- CNV vcf and plots, generated by QDNAseq
- VEP vcf of SNV annotations
    - csv containing variants with population allele frequencies < 0.01
- quality control statistics
    - cramino stats for full alignment includes data yield, N50, etc.
        - cramino stats for target region includes more accurate estimate of read lengths for target region only
    - phasing stats, generated with whatshap
    - hp_dp stats, the average read depth per haplotag in targeted regions.

## Changed defaults

- naming pattern expects sample identifier to be separated by '.' rather than '-', e.g. GM16888.aligned.bam rather than GM168888-aligned.bam
- VEP, cuteSV, SVIM, and report making suppressed by default 
- email notifications attached to cramino qc completion rather than reports
- CNVs made using simple thresholds, downsampled to 10% of reads
- CNV bin size = 500kb, adjust in config file
- file pattern for outputs: SAMPLEID-ONT-hg38-FLOWCELL-KIT-METHYLATION. Do not use '-' within any defineid variable; '_' ok.

### Modifiations in update

 - updated conda environments and tool versions
 - improved Sniffles 2 calling within repeat expansions
 - added chrM to clair3 calls

## Requirements

Snakemake >= 8.16.0

Python >= 3.10
